ROOMS
A Navigable 3D Maze
by Thomas Bell

I started this project with the desire to make a navigable 3D maze game with a narrative about storing/retrieving data on a server, but ended up creating something quite different. As I progressed through the process of programing the virtual environment, I became less interested in the narrative and more interested in what it means to use technology to simulate something of the physical world. I started to think about how code acts a mutual language and means of communication between the computer and the designer. First it takes an understanding of what the computer is capable of doing with the language, then the ability to communicate something that will be meaningful to a human audience within the computer’s capabilities. Thinking about programming in this way influenced a shift in the underlying concept and narrative for ROOMS.

The player finds themselves navigating from one room to another through mysterious holes in the wall. All the rooms are the same, except for their varying wall colour, and this makes it difficult to navigate at first. As the player moves through the space more and more, they discover that there are objectives and items to help them achieve those objectives throughout the map. The game consists of 3 challenges (stages), each rewarding the player with a package upon completion. Each package consists of the soundtrack for that stage, a map, and a note guiding the player towards their next objective.

For me, the goal of ROOMS is to have the player question the simulated physicality of a virtual experience. The first factor towards achieving this is the implementation of in-game items as downloaded files. Although downloading a file onto one’s computer does not make it physical, the game is now existing outside of the player’s browser, and on their personal hard drive, which is arguably more physical. Another detail that reinforces this concept is the initialed notes (“TB”), which provides the player with a trace of the maker of the simulated world they are in. One file in the game even has an image with my thumb in the corner; an even more explicit reference to the designer.

The challenge that each stage presents will hopefully push the player to further consider the game’s underlying concept. Stage 3, for example, has the player edit a section of code to “fix” a “broken” room simulation. Also in this stage is the lime room, which in unlike the other rooms and once the player has entered, all of the doors, including the one they came through, lead only to other lime rooms. After leaving the final room of the maze the music cuts out and the screen goes white. This is an abrupt ending, like pulling a plug, and I hope to draw attention to the simulated experience by highlighting the impermanence of it. Unlike the real world, the virtual exists at the whim of technology as well as the designer.

I used html, css, javascript, jQuery, jQuery UI, easel, and Gibber to create ROOMS. The map was designed first on paper; numbering and colouring each room. This way I could play with the design freely before bringing it into the code. The information for each room (wall colour and any adjacent rooms) was then translated into nested arrays. The player uses the left and right arrow keys to spin around in a room. Spinning increases or decreases the variable d depending on the direction of spin. The variable loops back to 0 at 360, and vice versa, and stops at increments of 90 so that the player can only face either the north, east, south, or west wall. Using space bar or the up arrow key, the player can move through a hole into another room. This increases the variable m from 0 to 100, updating the room number and resetting the variable once it has reached 100. These variables, d and m, are used in equations to update the location of key points on a canvas, which are used to animate the scene. The easel library was then used to draw, erase, and redraw lines and shapes using these key points every time the d and m variables are updated.

As for the soundtrack, my friend Adrian Hu used the Gibber library to compose 4 different scores; one for each stage and one for the lime room. We found that after a certain amount of time in the maze, the music would start to glitch while spinning or moving the mouse. We didn’t try to solve this because the transparency of the technology used to represent real world things, in this case with regards to programmed music as oppose to real instruments, is key to the underlying concept of ROOMS.
